[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In an attempt to know how
organic versus conventional
farmed food impacts the
health and development
of our children, the American
Academy of Pediatrics conducted
an intensive study.
The report finds
multiple positives
for organic consumption but
says the effects of pesticides
on human health over a lifetime
still have not been studied.
To talk more about
this, I spoke earlier
with Robin O'Brien, a leading
children's health advocate.
>> First off, Robin,
let's just clarify--
what is certified organic as
opposed to conventional food?
>> That's a really
great question,
because when I was first
starting to look into the food
supply and the recent changes
and new ingredients that have
been introduced, I thought the
organic symbol was really just
a marketing tool that was
slapped on a product that was
more expensive.
But what I learned is that it's
actually a legal representation
and that by law, that symbol
means that that product has
been produced without the use
of artificial growth hormones,
artificial dyes,
high-fructose corn syrup,
genetically
engineered ingredients
that have been made to withstand
increasing doses of pesticides.
And so really, what it means
is that that form of production
adheres to a legal standard.
And then if those farmers are
in violation of that standard,
they're fined for it.
So basically, it's
a seal of approval.
>> Pesticide-free?
>> No, not pesticide-free,
but genetically engineered
ingredients are not allowed
to be used in the production
method.
And so when you look at that,
you're like, OK, well, here's
this list of
ingredients that aren't
allowed into organic food.
And if you look at that list
of ingredients, a lot of them
are pretty new, introduced in
the last, say, 20 or 30 years.
So what we're calling
organic food today--
our grandmothers, they
just called it food.
>> Right, right.
So unfortunately,
this study shows
that there hasn't
been enough studies
of the impact of the pesticides
over a person's lifetime.
But what pediatricians
are saying
is that they definitely know
that pesticides significantly
affect the development of
children, in their brains
particularly.
>> Well, exactly.
And again, these pesticides--
we started with one
set of pesticides, and we
introduced a new level.
And we're constantly
engineering new pesticides,
synthetically creating
them in these laboratories.
And so they're
advancing as rapidly
as the food industry is itself.
And what we're realizing is that
as we have modified and changed
and synthetically produced
all of these new classes
of chemicals and
synthetic pesticides,
we have no idea what the
long-term effect of that
is going to be.
And the concern right now
is on the developing system
of a child, whether it's the
developing immune system,
the developing nervous
system, or the developing
digestive system.
We don't know what those
long-term impacts are.
>> It appears that this study
was done with the mission
to determine, at least
for the pediatrician.
And so how to talk to
parents and advise them
what is a wise food choice?
What is this truly saying?
Do we need to be concerned?
>> Well, I think what we're
realizing is that we're waking
up to the fact that the
landscape of childhood has
changed and that when you're
dealing with the record number
of children we now have
with autism or allergies
or diabetes-- or cancer is
the leading cause of death
by disease in kids--
that is completely
changing childhood.
It's changing a practice
for a pediatrician,
and it's changing
everything for a parent.
At the same time,
the landscape of food
has changed really
dramatically when
you consider that we
recently introduced
these genetically engineered
ingredients into our food.
We've got increasing
doses of pesticides
being poured on our food
crops out in the field.
We've got high-fructose
corn syrup, which
was introduced in the '70s.
Aspartame, the
artificial sweetener--
that was introduced in the '80s.
These are relatively
new ingredients.
And I think what
maybe has happened
is that perhaps for the American
Academy of Pediatrics, where
they were schooled one
way for a very long time,
they're suddenly confronting
these changes in their practice
every single day.
And so I think this
effort with this study
was as much to school them as
it was to school the rest of us
>> Thank you so
much for joining us.
>> Appreciate it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]